“Fire!”

It rolled down the tunnel like a deluge. Not the flames. Just the word.

“Christ!” I lay on my stomach, the tunnel only eighteen inches high. Hy lay farther in, just in front of me, the backlit silhouette of his boots toward me. “Christ, Hy, we’ve got fire!”

On elbows and hips I scrambled backward on my belly. Hy’s boots twisted around and came, his lantern throwing flickering shadows around his limbs. Gravel dug hard under my shirt.

“I’ve got the spade!” he yelled in grunts, his huge frame rolling and twisting to gain ground.

“There’s no—” Dirt and sand sprayed from the ceiling. I tried to keep moving, spit and coughed. Hy’s oncoming boots scraped into my cheeks.

“Go!” His voice muffled. I scurried farther back up the tunnel, wet gravel driving up my pant legs. Backing, squirming, fighting the urge to try to rise and crawl and scream. Echoed shouts from behind us. Driving backward, pushing, scraping, the sound of my breath and Hy’s grunts filling my ears—and suddenly my feet were pushing into the main tunnel. I twisted, gained my knees and pulled out of the tiny advance shaft.

The only light was the single flame of Hy’s lantern in the shaft near the floor. Distant, shrill voices echoed through the darkness. Hy’s boots pushed out of the hole. I grabbed his cuffs and dragged him. As his head emerged, he rolled and got to his feet, his blackened face almost invisible in the darkness. I grabbed our masks from the floor and threw one. “Mask!”

“Take the spade!”

I spun around and ran up the tunnel. Crouching, tripping in a mine only four and a half feet high, arms, head, and shins scraped against hack-hewn walls. These were not proper mines. Not properly dug or buttressed. We dug them in haste. We dug them in hate and panic. The Huns and the French had dug trenches and had turned a war of idiocy to one of insanity. But here, fifty fathoms below a vanished town, reason itself had smothered. The trenches became tunnels, and the tunnels became the war. Fifty fathoms down, we’d fallen so far under that we looked up to insanity like daylight.

The tunnel cornered. Hy knocked into me, grabbing and pushing me on with his bulk. Shouts and a movement of light far ahead.

“Richard, you smell it?”

“I don’t—I don’t. No smoke!” I lurched on, my shadow looming black before me.

Smoke was good. Smoke rises. If there’s a fire and no smoke, the fire’s between you and the world. Water’s worse. Water pushes you back down. Nearly to the manway when the concussion hit. No flash. The floor kicked out from under us. The sound pounded my skull until the sudden silence of eardrums stretched tight. I hit the floor in silence. Hy falling on top of me. My own scream, noiseless. Hair sucked suddenly forward and the silence cracked open by a great inhale. Hy pulling himself up. My feet moving under him. My hands clawing for the spade.

“Not a camouflet!” He coughed out, stumbling. “That’s not German!”

“It’s ours!” I was up and running, head rebounding hard from the ceiling. Air thick with dirt. I fumbled with the mask. The tunnel widened. A piling mound of sand and dirt beneath a ceiling suddenly disappearing into filthy blackness above. The manway ladder, fifty-one fathoms, three hundred and thirteen rungs straight up.

The second concussion hit far harder. I fell on my knees. Dust swarmed at us down the manway. Hot breath of dirt. Hy’s meat fingers dragging me back into the gallery.

“That’s ours!” I screamed at him again, pressing the mask against my face. Gravel and fist-size rocks rained down the manway.

Hy was tying the lantern to his belt. I tied the mask straps behind my head, shoved the spade into my belt and without looking back, ran into the pelting gravel.

The wooden rungs, pinioned into the rock, were slippery with wet. The pumps far above were off. Water and mud splattered on the mask’s eyepieces so each rung was a blind grapple. The light from below shifted, Hy coming up behind. The shadows of the rungs swiveled beneath my hands, and for the merest second came a thought; my wife, Tryphena, in her nightgown, laughing, running up our staircase with a single candle. Spindles casting black lines across walls. Flickering with her breathless laugh. In those early days, we Britons looked across the channel at the burgeoning war with hauteur and derision. Neither lasted long.

The Germans always took the high ground first. They laid out their trenches and forced the French to dig in downhill. But not here. Both armies arrived together, both fired relentlessly on the other until forced to dig trenches on either side of the hill instead of atop it. This became the only point on the Western Front where the armies could not directly see each other. They obliterated the hilltop village. They tunneled into the hill to plant explosives under the enemy positions—everyone on the entire front did—but in this place it had gone further. Instead of mining for the trenches, we were all now mining for the mines. We dug tunnels under their tunnels. They dug tunnels under ours. They went deep and we went deeper. We whispered in the dark because stone carries sound. We listened and we dug. We chose soft-stone veins to keep our shovels quiet. We rested our teeth on rocks to hear distant digging. And every few days one side or the other would estimate positions, fill a mine with ammonium nitrate and with the efficiency of war, slaughter and bury a score of men in a blink.

My forearms were failing as I neared the first landing in the manway. I had expected another concussion. Had expected the manway to collapse. Expected to be dead. I pulled myself onto the narrow landing ledge and pushed myself into the cross-tunnel there. The smell of burning was suddenly thick, and as the light came up the shaft with Hy, I saw the ceiling roiling in black smoke, pouring into the manway and falling away to the distant heights. I grabbed Hy’s hand and brought him over the landing rim.

“Look!” I grabbed his lantern hand and lifted it to the ceiling.

“This is Milligan and Wake’s line,” he shouted through his filter.

I twisted around to look deeper into the cross-tunnel, wiped at my mask eyes. Turn around. Keep going. Don’t see what you came down here never to see. “We’ve got twenty fathoms to go!” I yelled back. Just get out. Get away. “Sixty feet in smoke. Any problem with that?” In the lone candlelight, I could just make out Hy behind the scratched glass of the mask, his eyes lit in a mad, lustful fire. I stared for only half a second before we were moving again.

Hunched low beneath the rush of smoke, we were just reaching for the rungs when light moved in the tunnel. Out of the black on black stepped Milligan. Milligan, so thin and short he could almost stand erect. Little more than a shadow stretched over an accountant’s frame, he half stumbled, half walked out of the blackness.

He stepped out holding an ignition flare.

I shoved my mask up. “Milligan!”

He jerked, startled. There were sharp lines across his body. Redness, bled and burned, glistened brightly in the dark. The flare cast his browned, blackened features in the softest light. He looked at me. As if he’d gotten bad news. Blue eyes stood out from the gray and brown of his skin and undershirt. Such soft blue. What children have in paintings. Such a beautiful, beautiful blue. The ignition flare reflected gently in them. He’d lit his own nitrate. Looking for the quick release and the quicker burial. Looking for the other way out of the tunnels, through the sky in his own eyes.

I reached quickly for my sidearm, so unfamiliar I had to look down for it. I drew it quickly and pointed it, arm’s length.

“Don’t move,” I said. Hy breathed on my neck.

Milligan looked at the muzzle as if it was just an outstretched hand. Then to the floor. Then back to me. I hadn’t seen blue in months.

“Don’t move,” I said again. “Goddamn,” I coughed hard. “Goddamn. I—I don’t—you go up after Hy. And I’ll be right behind you, and don’t think you can try anything because I’m still armed.” Still looking at me, he coughed; a silent contortion of his body. “Where’s…” I tried to see past him in the darkness. “Where’s Wake?” It wasn’t really a question. “Goddamn. Goddamn. Let’s go. Come on. Drop the flare.”

He dropped it, and the glimmer of light left the blue.

We climbed the last twenty fathoms fast, ignoring the last two landings. Despite the mask, the smoke found its way into my lungs. Milligan’s feet moved rung-to-rung before me, played by dim shadows from the lantern. Without a mask, his coughing took on a sickly, gagging grate.

The manway opened into the bunker, dug just a few feet below the surface. Smoke churned along the ceiling and up the broad exit tunnel out to the trenches. Black-faced miners, cursing venomously in French and English, scurried up the exit. Hush swept them as Milligan emerged from the manway at the end of my gun. For five impossibly long seconds the mines were silent again.

And then the men shouted to a new pitch. Milligan was snatched by a dozen hands and he snapped under them as if his muscles, bones, and will were all left flickering somewhere below. He started to resist as they dragged him. Tried to gain his feet but was pulled in all directions at once. Meat in a ravenous pack. Six or seven pulling him up the slope of the tunnel. Light from the outside world reflected across the damp stone beneath him. Damp from snow. Damp from outsideness. He was talking now, but I couldn’t hear well. He was out of sight up the slope, up toward the mouth, and all I could see was where he broke the reflections of white off the rock.

Lieutenant Lipkin was lowering my gun for me.

“You’ve done a man’s work, Merrick. Not easy, huh? Drawing on one of your own.” He stared hard at me. At my cheeks, my chin and eyebrows in turn. “But y’know that’s what separates us out. Coming through. You came through when it was toughest.” He pushed my hand back toward my holster, stink of his skin near my face. Behind him the enlistees were staring, too. Lipkin turned around and seemed to force his hands onto his hips. “It’s what we do. It’s what we have to do. You all know it. Could be anybody goes crackers. Could be any of you, but to think quick if somebody loses it—that’s what separates us out. It could have gotten worse but for Richard. Every one of us owes him for this one! He’s a hero! A true Englishman!”

Begrudgingly at first, then with increasing enthusiasm, agreement spread. A few clapped. Some translated for the French. My legs were aching. I sank back against the wall.

Lipkin got the men moving, sending most outside for a breather, saying it was snowing again; sending others back down with masks to start clearing the smoke, carbon monoxide and debris. I sat, rubbing hard at my brow, hand over my eyes. Some who passed patted my shoulders. Hero, some said. Thanks, said others. They were eager to get up out of the rock and into sunlight and sky. I hadn’t come up any higher than the bunker for the last two months. I couldn’t go up there. If I saw white snow or blue sky I think I’d start crying and never come back down. Milligan’s eyes hurt enough. A whole sky would kill me. Nobody liked Milligan. He kept to himself but hoarded everything. Kept trinkets of everything. Scared to throw anything away. I lowered my head between my knees, felt my chin quivering, and hid my eyes under my palm. Nobody liked Milligan anyway.

Two sharp snaps echoed down from the world of snow and air and sky. My palm grew wet. Nobody liked him anyway.

A rough pat on my back as the last of the sappers walked past.

Hero.

I locked my muscles to keep still as my eyes and nose dripped to the rock between my feet.

“It’s your bid, dear,” she said.

I looked up. Blinked. “What?”

Tryphena smiled. The smile wavered. “It’s your bid.”

“Damn, Richard,” Bogswell cut in, “Pay attention. This is serious.”

Bogs thumbed the cards in his hand. Across the table, Tryphena straightened slightly in her wheelchair, eyes on me. Millicent on my right. I looked back at the cards in my hand.

“I’m sorry. I’m… I was distracted.”

“You were philosophizing about the damn war again,” Bogs shot back, still staring at his cards. “I’m telling you it’s nothing like what you think it will be. War nowadays is a civilized matter. Pointless to make up stories to trouble yourself. No account for it.” He ran a tongue behind his lips and his grand handlebar mustache canted one way and the other. Tryphena’s eyes were still steadfast on me.

“I apologized. I was just thinking a moment. My bid.”

I made my bid, and Bogswell abruptly made his. Tryphena and I held our gaze for a moment more before she inhaled quietly and looked to her cards.

We were in my brother Bogswell’s study, in his Twickenham estate on the southwest side of London. The fireplace burned brightly behind Tryphena, keeping the autumn chill pushed back to the dark windows and silhouetting her chignon in a halo. Millicent seemed crouched in her chair though her spine was straight as yardstick. Her cheeks twitched and emotions seemed to flitter beneath her face as she thumbed her cards first in one direction, then the other. Traces of cool air seeped along the floor from the patio doors behind me. We met here in the heavy stone room every fortnight to keep company over a game of bridge whist. We usually played for ha’pennies. Tonight, we played for much more.

“Millicent, please darling, a touch of haste will serve you.”

“I’m thinking,” she said, a bit more abruptly than she seemed to intend. “Don’t fluster me when I’m thinking.”

“There’s no nobler act of a countryman than to lay down his life for his God and king,” said Bogs, staring down his nose at his cards, but clearly addressing me. “If God turns my cards sour, I should think myself almost blessed. I’ll be proud to carry the family name to the enemy. Damn Huns will shake at the name of Merrick, I can promise you that. I’ll strike it as a battle cry with every charge.”

“I doubt either of us would be brought to a charge,” I said. He turned to me. Ty glanced up without moving her head. “Our business is coal mining. We’ll likely be assigned to the Royal Engineers, designing trenches and managing equipment and excavations.”

“You might,” he muttered, quickly smoothing the tips of his mustache. “You’re the tinkerer, but I’m more of a leader of men. Let others wallow in the ditches. If I’m going to France it’s to lend some backbone to the French and end this silly war. Damn fool business. All of it. France and Germany both be damned. Nothing useful ever came from either.”

“Einstein is German.”

“Proust is French,” added Tryphena without looking up. The fire glowed hot behind her.

“You prove my point. Millie, for god’s sake, bid, dear.”

“Don’t rush me!” The fire crackled gently in the sudden quiet. Millicent, eyes shining, looked quickly away from Bogs to Tryphena and me before returning her eyes to her cards. Looking well through them.

Bogs continued. “Unlike you, brother, I have read about Einstein.”

“I’ve read him as well.”

“It’s distraction and illusion. That’s all it is. He says time itself is different for everyone. He says in essence that the whole structure of God’s good universe hinges on who happens to be observing it. Poppycock.”

“You’re all just sitting here,” Millicent’s voice rising. “You’re talking—how can you just talk about these stupid, stupid things and play these damn cards when we all know it’s the last we’ll ever play. I don’t want you to go, Bogsy! I don’t want you to go into that!”

“Millie, representing one’s family and country is an honor. If I lose this hand, I’ll be proud to—”

“It’s not a damned honor.” Her voice broke and her eyes welled. “I was at the baker’s this morning. Ty and I went and Mrs. Edgerton’s son was there. He came back from the front a month ago and there’s nothing of him left. No injuries or scars but Marlene says he’s still in the war, in his head.” She dropped her cards to the table, fumbling for her kerchief. “She has to change his bedding every morning. Every morning because he pisses himself! She can’t have loud sounds in the house. She gave away their gramophone because she found him spitting and crying under her bed. I don’t—” she cut herself off, palming the kerchief hard to both eyes. Ty leaned far out of her wheelchair and held Millicent’s arm.

“It’s nonsense,” Bogs muttered. “No injury at all. It’s weakness, nothing more. Weakness of character.”

“That’s not true,” said Tryphena. Bogswell looked directly at her; a steady, silent stare. Ty was still leaning toward Millicent, holding her hand and arm. Ty was not looking at Bogs, but her jaw was set, keeping herself in check. “’What an abyss of uncertainty when the mind feels part of itself has strayed beyond its own borders; it is face to face with something which does not so far exist, to which it alone can give reality and substance, which it alone can bring into the light of day’.”

The fire crackled for a long moment before I asked, “What is that?”

“It’s Proust. My own translation.”

“You’re translating it?”

Still leaning awkwardly toward Millicent, Ty looked at me, smiling a warm, private smile. “Just some,” then toward Bogs, the smile hardening to polite; “It means we can’t choose what we are because we are made of our experience and memories. Our very reality is crafted from our memories. And that boy is full of horrible memories.”

“I can’t pretend to agree to that,” Bogs delivered to his cards.

Millicent sniffed, wiping hurriedly. “She said his division was out of contact for eight months. No mail. No word from home at all.” She wiped again at her nose and eyes, patted Ty’s hand and picked up her cards again. Ty’s chair creaked as she sat back.

“If a man took his memories with him,” I asked, quietly, “very good memories, would that reality give him strength in a horrible place?”

She sat erect, chin strong through custom, firelight ringing her soft features. “I don’t know.” Muscles in her cheeks moved, and I realized I was gritting my own teeth. “I just read a book.”

The sound of the fireplace filled the room again. We stared at each other. At the same moment I could see both the depth of her eyes and the shape of her body, proud and straight. I reached out a foot beneath the table. I knew she couldn’t feel the touch of my shoe against her leg, but I knew also that she was aware I was doing it. The slight motion of my body as my balance moved, the slight motion of hers in response. Her dead limbs, all but dismissed, were not so disengaged.

She cleared her throat, the small sound loud in the stillness. “When the Greek mariners would set sail on long journeys, their wives told them to look at the moon every night. If they could both see the same thing, then they could not be so far apart. Not alone.”

I nodded, slightly. Cold air seeped through the patio doors.

“Look to the moon,” she said.

My nose stung. I shifted my weight and stood, leaning against the rock. Hy called, “Come on, daydream boy!”

I looked over at him. “I wasn’t daydreaming.”

“You were thinking about your wife again.” He slapped my back. “Hero. You get all misty. They’ve cleared out the pipe,” he said, turning around. “You ready to go back down?” I let the air out of my filthy lungs and followed him toward our manway.

Lieutenant Lipkin’s boots clacked on the bunker’s stone. “God-all-bloody-mighty, don’t you two want to go topside and breathe some real air? You’ve got time. Milligan probably scared every Jerry out of the ground. They’re not digging.”

Hy’s mass cocked toward me. “You want a go up?”

Just a few feet up the wide bunker tunnel was a world so bright it could turn the sky blinding white. I shook my head.

“Dicky and I are going back down, Lieutenant.”

Lipkin looked as though he was weighing his rank in his head. He shrugged and muttered, “God-all-bloody. I don’t know about you two. Go on. Have you heard anything down there lately?”

“Not aside from our own men trying to bury us,” I muttered, rubbing my face. “And we’re still sharing one dig-out spade. We need two.”

Hy held two thick fingers before the lieutenant’s face. “Two spades.”

“Supply said this week for sure,” said Lipkin. “I’m sorry.”

“Sure, this week,” I said.

“Fitsner and Johnson thought they heard pick hits a few hours back,” said Hy. “Nothing down our way, though.”

“Damn,” Lipkin said to the floor. “Damned Jerries are turning again.”

He dismissed us, and I walked down the bunker slope to the manway, Hy’s huge shoulders scraping walls before me.

My first impression of Hieronymus was that he was big. My second was that he was a big idiot. The day before we received our assignments some of our brigade took advantage of the evening amusements of Varennes. Hieronymus was sitting on the bar with a small semi-circle gathered around. Red hair above a smile that seemed thick with billiard balls for teeth. He was talking with massive motions of his massive arms.

“And I’m looking up the trench, and I’m looking down the trench, and nobody’s doing anything. And Weglier is out there screaming his head off, and I’m thinking Christ! Our cook’s out there with a bullet in him and nobody’s doing nothing! And I mean the screams were enough to back your blood up your veins! And I’m thinking Christ! The best flapjacks to grace a plate are up there bleeding to death, and everybody’s too busy kacking in their trousers to do anything. So I tell this one bloke to cover me and he looks at me like he’s still kackin’ his trousers, so I grab him.” He grabbed someone’s handy lapels and the someone was instantly off-balance. “So I grab him and yell right in his face, flapjaaaacks! And Christ, he started crying. So anyway I just got up out of the trench and walked out and got Weglier. There are bullets and stick bombs and minnie-werfers popping all around me but Christ, I mean he used to slather them in butter. War crime. That’s what it coulda been. A real war crime.”

Fitsner, who I’d seen often in training, was waiting for his drink at the bar near me. He leaned over. “A fiver says the fat pig has never seen a day of combat.”

“He transferred in,” said Wake, elbowing between us. “I don’t know from where, but it coulda been the front. His name’s Hieronymus.”

“Meat,” I said, keeping my officer’s air of detachment. “He has what we used to call a head full of meat. It’s obvious just looking at him. The man has the brain of an ox’s arse. Just pray he doesn’t get assigned to any brigade you’re in.” I raised my glass slightly. “To Hieronymus Meat.”

Fitsner and Wake wouldn’t toast with an officer, but they smiled and clinked their mugs together before heading back to the sapper’s table. When I left the club, Hy was walking into a back room with an inebriated French woman cocked in each elbow. Fitsner later learned they’d called him the same thing.

He wasn’t assigned to my division, but three and a half months later, he transferred in. By that time, I’d stopped acting as an officer. By that time, my trips into daylight were beginning to wane.

I stood in the freezing wet of the front trench; light, gentle January snowflakes melting to pools of muddied excrement and blood. Lieutenant Cooke, Lipkin’s predecessor, marched quickly around the parapet, the slight stoop in the shoulders every trench soldier learned the first time he saw the top of a friend’s head burst from a lucky German round. Behind him strolled Hieronymous.

“Richard, this is Hieronymous. Volunteer transfer. Done a lot of trench mining in Verdun. He’s your mate. Show him around.”

“Your name’s Richard?” Hy asked as Cooke stomped past me. “As in Dick?”

“As in Richard,” I said, motioning toward the entrance of Olean — a seven-foot wide circle cut into the wall of the trench. Named, like every entrance, after a French metro station. Almost perfectly round.

“Nah, not right now,” he said as he passed. “It’s got to be Dick.”

“No, it doesn’t.”

“Aye, it does. You’ve got to be Dick.” I glared at his back. He walked up to the hole before him, spread his arms wide, threw his head back and shouted straight at the sky, “Because we’re about to be envaaaaaginated!”

The cleanup of Milligan’s mental collapse was quick and thorough. By the time we got to the lower manway, the French crew was already hoisting out the last of the debris in a backfill cart. In a broken meld of French and English, one of them said they’d found Wake’s arm. Hy started down the manway ladder, the lantern hanging from his belt. I followed him, his dim flame casting my rungs in a moving light.

“Christ,” he laughed as he climbed down below me, “I thought we were goners that time.” He howled and the throat of the manway sucked it down. Water dripped loudly out of the black, and stale air moved up the manway as hoses pumped silently. The small deadman’s spade, a man’s only hope of digging himself out of a collapse, hung from the back of my belt, tapping my thighs with each rung.

“You know, we shouldn’t even be down here without a bloody spade for every man.”

“I think Fitsner is hoarding an extra one under his shovels. What an ass.”

“You’ve insulted asses.”

“Telling you, that bloke’s got nought in his head but spiders and broken glass.”

Hy’s feet splashed into the puddle at the bottom of the manway. For months the French had skirted the water table until mining companies like mine improved the pumps. And then we could sink as low as we wanted.

I dropped into the puddle as well, Hy’s light already disappearing down our gallery. As at every landing above us, two tunnels diverged into the blackness. Fitsner and Johnson’s gallery extended north for thirty feet and ours south for thirty before we both cornered sharply east toward the Germans. It gave us two galleries sixty feet apart to listen, to triangulate, to try to close in on the Jerry miners. The Germans always had better pumps than we did, so they would beat us to the depths every time. Intelligence said one of their tunnels was running between ours and Fitsner and Johnson’s. We wanted to dig under them, plant the nitrate and retreat before they knew they were going to be interred where they lay. We wanted to dig under them, not into them. Some sapper in Gare du Nord was digging and all of a sudden his pick just fell into the wall. When he pulled it back there were shocked German expressions staring back. From there it was a scrambling matter of who could pack the most powder into their tunnel. The Jerry camouflets ignited first. We’d all had friends in du Nord.

At the end of our gallery lay our picks, shovels, and blankets near the low opening of the advance tunnel. Hy sat on the floor with a grunt.

“Damn.” He sucked at his tongue. “I didn’t think it could get any dustier.” He turned and spat. “Tastes like this woman I knew in Scotland. Knew her, I did.” He looked up and winked. “She was the type you were supposed to get to know, but she used so much face-paint. Christ, ya kiss and come back with a face-full of white muck.” He spit black again. “Actually this tastes better.” He lowered his voice. “Let’s see if we shook up our neighbors.”

We each grabbed a shovel, wedged the blade tight against the rock wall and bit the back of the blade hard with our molars. We closed our eyes and pressed fingertips deep into our ears. We could never hear anything beyond the whine in our heads for the first minute or so, and we rarely heard anything at all this far down, but sometimes we could make out the sound of German pick hits vibrating through the soapstone somewhere in the hill. As we waited, listening past the grit moving in our nostrils, I heard a tick.

My eyes shot open. Hy’s did as well. We stared at each other in the dim lantern light. Tick. Tick Tick. I let go of the blade and mouthed Close! Hy, shovel still in teeth, flicked his eyebrows.

Tick. I heard it. Heard it without the shovel. Not like a pick hit.

I crouch-ran up the gallery without the light. A faint light shone around our corner. I rounded it and there was Fitsner, tapping the rock with his spade. He snorted, opened his lantern back up, and walked back toward his gallery. I was standing in wet again, and from the smell of it, I knew what it was.

“Fitsner, you bloody kack-ass!” I hissed, as loudly as I dared.

His lantern faded up the gallery. Didn’t even laugh. Broken glass and spiders. The tunnel reeked of piss.

“Kack-ass!” I spat again. “When I see you I’m going to split your skull you hear me? You’re a… dammit a…”

“Tiomba,” called Hy.

“You’re a bloody kack-ass Tiomb—Hy, what the hell am I saying?”

“It’s a Tanganyika word for a man who doesn’t sleep in the men’s hut during his wife’s monthlies.”

I stared at him. He sat in the small sphere of light down the tunnel, digging black phlegm.

“Fitsner you’re a goddamn kack-assed Tiomba shit-wallah!” My voice echoed through the mine. “Christ, I wish he were German.”

Hy was smiling as I approached. He broke off a piece of chipped metal from the pick handle and started bending it. “Dump your next shit in his backfill cart. Stick this in the clasp. When he sends it up it’ll drop open and give him a shower.”

I started working on the shit.

“How’d you know about the Tanganyika word?”

“Been there.”

“Really?” I found myself at a loss for a facial expression. “I’ve never been out of England, except for now.” I sat on the floor, back against the wall. “The family business—kept me on the island, I suppose.”

“Sounds like it kept you confined.” He handed me the bent metal.

“No, this is confined.” I gestured to the ceiling with my chin. Tried to make it sound funny.

“You’re the one keeping yourself down here.”

“Belt up,” I said. “Just shut it.” I never designed a trench. The day I first marched into the rear supply line, Cooke took me down to a bunker and laid out the mines. The French had several, but the Huns’ were always more numerous and deeper. The English reinforcements brought better sappers and better equipment. A few of us knew mining, and we set out to trump the German designs. Mortar fire in the trenches was rare, but sharpshooters from both sides hid in no-man’s-land across the hilltop and kept everyone in their crouch. Once every few days one side or the other would detonate a mine, and part of the hill would tear free and take a few dozen men out of the trenches forever. We jolted at every sound, above or beneath. I started to like the quiet of the mines, where we still expected death at every moment, but one harsh and swift. “You chose this, too,” I muttered, wiping the eyepieces of my gas mask against my shirt.

“But I want to be here,” he said, crumbling phlegm from his fingers. “You’re hiding down here.”

“Why in hell would you want to be here?”

“’Cause, Dicky.” His eyes glowed hot and mad in the lantern light. “Because this is the place.”

I spat on the eyepiece. “You’re the kack-ass.”

He took the spade from beside me, and moved the lantern closer to the advance tunnel. “All right, probably,” he smiled wide. “But that doesn’t mean I’m wrong.”

“Belt it.”

“This, all this.” He tapped the wall. “I absolutely love this.”

“Oh it’s a fine one, isn’t it? You going bloody crackers? Shut your gob or I’ll report you and they’ll do you like—” I shut up. Threw my mask aside. Hy just watched me. I ground my teeth together.

“This is the place to be,” he said quietly.

“Not for me it isn’t.”

“I didn’t say for you.”

I shot him disgust. He was still sitting, looking at me with the strangest smile. Baby smile. Like a red-haired-baby smile.

“I’m not listening anymore.”

“My goal, my real goal, is to swim the mares.”

I wasn’t listening. I tossed the blankets farther up the gallery and moved the shovels. Hy got down on his belly before the advance.

“I mean, I love dabbling around down here.” He pushed the lantern into the advance and dragged himself after. The light disappeared with him and the familiar darkness swarmed in. “But I’ve always got my eye on the moon.” The advance swallowed his words. I waited in the darkness, the scrape of Hy’s boots waning.

The air seemed cold. The rock seemed cold. Everything seemed cold.

“What?” I turned suddenly. Scant glimmers of light across the floor. “What did you say?”

Deep in the advance, he couldn’t hear.

I looked around me as if expecting to see something. The last of the light disappeared. I blinked into the heavy blackness where Nurse Mayhem’s face broke through with all its red hair.

“Easy,” she said. “Sit up, sit up. You’re all right. Just breathe. Slowly. You all right? Oy, Richard, are you all right? Who am I? What’s my name?”

I coughed. Throat too tight. “Charon. Row me ‘cross the river.”

“I’m serious. What’s my name?”

“Mayhem,” I wheezed out a small cough. At this age all my coughs were wheezes. “Hopelessly in love with me. Keep telling you I could be your grandfather.”

She pressed a second pillow behind my back. “Close enough,” she muttered as she came around, staring closely at my face. “How’re you feeling?”

“Not great at the moment.” The room seemed to sway.

She pulled down my lower eyelids, stared into one eye then the other. Not without some care. “Well,” she sighed, “I suppose we know you can’t take the new stuff on an empty stomach.”

“Glad we got that straightened out,” I said. The room seemed to steady. My dentures were loose. Must have been grinding. “Hope you feel better now.”

“Be nice. You’ve a roommate to impress.”

Across the room was a new bed. Pressed sheets. Folded blanket. Suitcase and a man. He sort of tilted a palm at me.

“Impressed?” I coughed out.

“Sure.”

“Richard Merrick, this is Kyne Goodwin. Just transferred in. Kyne, this is Richard. Richard needs to have his temperature taken.”

“I don’t suppose you could take it orally, could you?”

“If you want, but this is a rectal and you’re my hardly my first patient.”

Nurse Maven was far too attractive to be sticking things up old men’s backsides. She helped me roll over and I stared at the gray bricks grinding their way through the plaster. A whole building of beautiful grey bricks on the outside. Ivy. Crisp shutters and windows that always faced the sunset. At least, that’s what I imagined since I’d never seen the outside of it. Just what I could make out from the walls of the courtyard in summer. Nurse Mayhem took my hand, but just for a pulse.

“Do you feel sick at all?”

“I was lightheaded at first.”

“You were mumbling something while you were out. Remember what you were dreaming?”

“No,” into the pillow. “How long was I out?”

“Kyne came in about three minutes ago, saw you and got me. I gave you your pills about twenty minutes ago, so it could have been as much as twenty minutes. You should thank Kyne. He may have saved you.”

“Thanks, Kyne,” out of the side of my mouth.

“Just do the same for me when I’m your age.”

“Cheeky.” I turned my head on the pillow. “How old are you?”

“Seventy-eight. How old are you?”

“Richard is our oldest resident.” Mayhem pulled out the thermometer and I flinched. “And he’s in better shape than most of us. See if you can learn any of his tricks.” She pulled up my underwear and I sat up. With a wipe of the thermometer she said, “You’re normal.”

I leaned toward Kyne. “That’s the only time you’ll ever hear that here.”

Nurse Mayhem left, saying she’d bring me some tea. I apologized to Kyne for making his first moments at CIHE consist largely of my arse.

“Do you know what ‘CIHE’ stands for, Kyne?”

He was unbuckling his suitcase. “St. Christopher’s Institutional Hospital of England.”

“Not quite. That’s what they want you to think. It’s really ‘Criminally Insane but Harmless Enough’.” I chuckled, but he didn’t laugh. I waved it off. “Sort of a joke around here.”

The suitcase was open and he was moving things into the dresser. From under a neatly folded undershirt, he lifted a wooden cross. “Would you mind if I hung this over my bed?”

“Not at all.” It was large, a foot long, but simple. “Kind of you to ask.”

“Some people take offense.” He laid it on the bed. “Me, I don’t think I could last in here without it. You?”

“No. Just never really saw the point.”

“The point? How about redemption? We’re not in this place because we’re saints.” He smiled at me as he placed rolled socks along the front of the top drawer. “I’ve found forgiveness.”

“I don’t think it’ll work for me. Here.” Bending at the waist, I tilted my head to the floor and spread my hair like carpet pile. “See that?” Bare spot.

“The hell is that?”

“That, my friend, is male pattern baldness of the square kind. I’ve got four more around my head where they roasted me.”

He stared at me, brow creased deep, until suddenly his eyes widened. “They gave you electroshock?”

“And plenty of it. They juiced me so badly they killed my hair. Not as if I had any to spare.” I smiled back, scratching my scalp. “You’d think they’d consider that.”

“You must have been one buggered-up poor sod to get that. I’ve never even heard of anyone who’s had that. What’d you do to earn it?”

“Ah.” I sat farther onto my bed. “That is the question. To be or not to have been. This—” I tapped my head “—was cooked in its shell. They tell me that happens. Maybe they told me that when they strapped me down, but I think they were just so worried about burning out the crazy that they didn’t care what memories burned out with it. I can’t find anybody who knows or will tell me. So many records were lost in the war… I just sit here and wonder what in hell I did to deserve this. Hard to ask forgiveness when you don’t know what you did.”

“It might still be worth looking into.”

“At my age? I might be too old to change. I’ve got an engineer’s mind. Tends to prefer logic.”

“I was an engineer.” He pushed his drawers closed and set the small suitcase on the floor. “It’s what drove me to God. Partly anyway.” He caught my raised eyebrow and sat his thin frame back onto the bed, leaning against the wall. He fingered the cross in his lap as he spoke. “I noticed you have a lot of science magazines.” He gestured to my small white bookshelf. “You keep up on physics?”

“I still like science and engineering. That didn’t get burned out.”

He nodded. “1905, Einstein comes up with special relativity, and rock-steady time disappears. 1924, Heisenberg comes up with modern quantum mechanics, and rock-steady matter becomes a ghost. 1934, Schrödinger shows the world that his cat is both dead and alive, and it hinges not on physics but on whether anyone sees it. In the fifties and sixties come the theories about how entire parallel universes may be generated from every decision we make, because it appears that subatomic particles predict our choices and act accordingly.

“It’s as if physicists, a hundred years ago, were closing in on the truth, and then just as we were about to shine a light into the very last dark corner, something happened and it all began to unravel. Now we’ve got entangled particles, where one particle can sense, instantly even across the entire universe, if somebody happens to observe its twin. And the standard model of physics looks promising, except every time we think we’re closing in on the last piece of it, we suddenly realize that, oops—” he smacks his forehead “—yet again, it’s just not quite the way we thought it had to be. It’s as if someone keeps moving the goalposts. Always, moving goalposts.”

“Doesn’t exactly build a case for your Almighty,” I said. “Sounds more like a rather poorly designed universe.”

“Yes,” he said, drawing out the word. Eyes alight. “But a designed universe, nonetheless.”

I narrowed my eyes at him. He noticed, but there was verve in him now.

“Look, when I see the last century of physics, I don’t see inevitable progress. I see a God whose children are peeling back the wallpaper of their reality, are chipping at the wainscoting and pulling up the floorboards. If you were God, what do you do when they’re shining a light into every crack they make? You don’t give them a blank wall and say ‘Here is the edge. Proceed no further.’ You do exactly what He is doing. Endless complications and moving goalposts. Every time we light a candle in the dark, we cast a thousand new shadows.”

“That’s fine, but you can’t say there’s design just because every answer brings more questions.”

“No, no you’re right,” he said. “I believe it’s designed because the, the…” he winced under the pressure of his own excitement. “The obfuscation, the shell game, is always connected to us. The shadows only fall where we try to see. See that’s it—the shadows only fall where we are trying to see. The more we look, the more it looks as if the universe was designed with the human mind in mind.”

The words settled a minute. I turned them over several times in my head. “But if we observers, with consciousness alone, can actually affect reality, then doesn’t that make us God?”

Kyne’s eyebrows seemed to roll up his forehead. He smiled. “Well now, I hadn’t really thought of that.” His grin widened and he twisted his face into exaggerated confusion. I laughed. Expression still bent with madness, he said, “Maybe we deserves da be in dis ‘opital.”

“Are you a Calvinist? Aren’t Calvinists the ones who think that as bad as this world may be, it must be the best of all possible worlds?”

“I’m not a Calvinist.” He shook his head, looking at his cross. “But this could be the best of all possible worlds.” He rubbed it with his thumbs and quieted. “I was a… I was an ugly man, with an ugly life. And I did a share of ugly things.” He tilted up the cross, still staring at it. “I deserve to be here, and it’s good that I am. For the person I was, yes, this is the best possible outcome.” He raised his eyes to me. “Don’t you think? All things considered, when you’re really honest, isn’t this the best place for you to be?”

I was quiet a long while. The stark yellow light from the hall was growing brighter than the light from the window. Snow glazed the field that crept up the hillside. Sweet and unbroken. A line of poplars rose up the tiny slope, blackened against the oncoming evening, keeping a vigil over what had been the division of farmer’s plots a few decades back. A wire fence fell through them. Posts wilting. Barbs grown into the poplars. Black against the snow.

“What time do you get up in the morning?” I turned to him.

“Seven. Eight maybe.”

I nodded. “When you get up, watch out front here. Around eight there’s a little girl, young woman actually, she walks down the drive there, and just as she gets to the line of poplars she breaks off and turns thataway. She’s done it every day for the last ten or so. I’m pretty sure she’s the warden’s daughter. He lives here and I know he’s got a wife, so that’s got to be his daughter. He used to walk with her, when she came up to his knee and had to take four steps for each of his. He’d walk, taking slow steps, hunched down.” I reached for the floor. “To hold her hand. And she would stay so close to him she’d bounce off his leg every time he took a step. Later, he’d come back alone. But then near evening he’d walk out again and come back with her. Every day they walked out, and every day they’d walk back. After a while I saw her walking herself. The first time I saw her was in the winter, and she’s out there walking in snow up to her thighs with these big steps, and my god, I just started crying. I mean she was old enough and all, it’s not as if her dad just threw her out into the snow, but I wanted to run out there and take her hand and walk her. Make sure she got there all right.

“When she started really becoming a woman, she brought a couple of friends home. I guess you don’t bring home a lot of friends when you live in a prison. She brought home a few young men, but they didn’t seem to last long. I didn’t like the look of them much. But she has this one fellow who sometimes comes to wait for her. He walks her to and from school. He walks with style and he treats her properly. That’s all right by me. But just a few months ago it really struck me; she’s always walked this same path, goes up around those poplars, and over the side of the hill. And you know something? I haven’t an idea in hell where she goes. I don’t know if that schoolhouse is on the other side of this hill or the other side of the damned country. I don’t know, and I never will know because my whole damned existence is right here.

“I was married.” I had to stop to clear my throat. Quick breath and kept my chin raised. “I think they allowed me visitors in the first days, but I can’t remember. And maybe she came then. Maybe she couldn’t take what happened or maybe I said horrible things. It was a long time before I could remember one moment to the next. When I could finally write a letter, my wife’s aunt wrote back that she’d been dead for four years.”

Kyne sat, cross in both hands, smell of skin and ammonia thick and supple between us.

“So, no.” I sat back against the wall. “No. Whatever it was I did, I’d never do it again. I’d undo it if I could. I’m not mad. I lost everything. I lost my wife, the laughs we never shared and the children we never had. Nothing can be worth losing that. Not one damn thing.”

Nothing.

Eventually, Kyne stood up and propped the cross carefully on his dresser. Outside, the sky was the blackest of blues. Just beyond the poplars, the fat crest of a yellow moon edged itself upward. I retrieved my cane, stood, and made for the doorway. I pulled at the old door, tearing sod away beneath it as I thrust it wide enough for Ty’s wheelchair. I rushed around behind her, grabbed the handles and drove her through; her screams of laughter muffled in her hand. I let go. She kept going. I spun about to yank closed the door to the cellar of my father’s stable. She crashed into something metallic and her laughter sprang out in full-throated abandon.

“What are you doing?” Laughter making my terse whisper far too loud. “Be quiet, you—!”

“What am I doing?” she mimicked me, turning her chair around. “You drove me into a boat!”

I snickered, getting behind her and pushing her away from one of the many boats my father stored below the stables. I’d turned fifteen just the beginning of that summer. Ty, a cousin of my cousin, had turned fifteen at the end of it. “We’ve got to get back to one of the empty stalls,” I whispered hard, driving her chair over unseen objects in the dim light.

“Be quiet about it!” she hissed, and squealed as the chair bounced to one side.

“They won’t find us here.”

“What about tracks? My wheel tracks? Across the pasture, did my wheels leave tracks?”

“How should I know? I was pushing you as fast as I could.”

“You were watching for horse ploppies, weren’t you?” She twisted around in the chair, and in the dim light her eyes shone summer green.

“I was just trying to get out of there before they reached a hundred. I thought you were steering.”

“Richard! I pushed the wheels! I might have horse plops on my hands!”

I laughed and steered her into a stall. A small, high window threw a beam of late afternoon sunlight across the floor. Buoys, white rope, and oars hung meticulously on the walls. I pushed her chair beside a wicker boat stool, set the small wooden brake, and sat down beside her.

“They’ll look in the stables, but I bet they’ll call uncle before they think to look down here.”

Ty held up her hands. Smeared with brown.

“This had better not be ploppies.”

“Well, smell it.”

“You smell it!” She swiped a hand at me and we were both surprised when it brushed my nose. “Oh! Richard, I’m so sorry!”

I wiped quickly at it. “I can’t believe you did that!”

She moved as if to cover her mouth in disbelief, stopped short as she saw her hands, then didn’t seem to know what to do.

No telltale stink. “It’s only mud. You are so lucky.”

She burst out laughing again. That throaty, lungful laugh.

I pulled down a rag from a shelf, dabbed my nose and held it out to Tryphena. Instead of taking it, she placed a hand into it. I began to wipe off her fingers.

“I need to ask you something somewhat odd,” she said. “I need you to look at my foot. When I hit that boat, I hit it with my foot and I don’t know if anything happened to it.”

“I’m sorry. I didn’t mean—”

“No, it’s fine. It happens sometimes. I just—have to check.” Her smile, bright in the sunlight, wavered slightly.

“Certainly. Of course.” I knelt down before her. The sharp tips of her boots poked out beneath her hem. Her hands jumped from the chair arms to her knees to her lap before she quickly leaned forward to lift her dress above her boots. They rose halfway up her calf in a long trail of laces. I hesitated a moment, then gingerly tugged the laces apart.

Ty cleared her throat. “My mother would scream if she saw me.”

I couldn’t think. The knot came apart and I put a finger in behind the cross of lace.

“She keeps telling me that when boys and girls are alone together, they can’t think properly.”

I tugged between each eyelet, loosening the lace down her shin. When I reached the last I put a hand behind her heel. “I just—” I made a pulling motion.

She nodded. “Yes. Sorry I can’t help.”

“No, I’m still sorry I…” I motioned awkwardly out the stall door. “…with the boat.” I pulled, and the boot slipped off. A silk, peach-colored sock.

She cleared her throat again and I made busy setting the boot against the stool so it wouldn’t fall. Put the laces back in some of the eyelets. Tuck the laces into the top. “Mother says that chemicals get into your brain and skew your thinking so you’re not seeing reality at all. She,” she forced a quick laugh, “she says if you marry a boy while you’ve got these chemicals in your brain, then they wear off and you’re married to a boorish oaf who runs a tea-shipping business and ignores you.”

“I—do ladies take off socks by pulling on the end? Or by peeling? From up—the top?”

“I usually—both somewhat. I suppose.”

There was quiet as I pulled both at the toe and calf, sliding the long sock off. Her pedicured foot seemed oddly bright in the ray of sunlight. I looked up to her and she looked up to the wall.

“Well?” she asked to the wall. “Any cuts or breaks? Anything I need to have Nanna look at?”

I lifted her foot in my palm, and raised each toe carefully. “They seem quite fine, I think.”

“You think?” She looked down to me.

“I mean, yes, they look fine. I don’t see anything amiss.” I glanced at it again. “You can’t—can’t feel anything?”

She shook her head. “I don’t even think much about them, except for dressing them. I don’t even really think of them as me. I see them more as part of the chair than of me.”

That part of the chair felt warm and soft in my hand. I suddenly realized I was staring at her. “I’m sorry, again, about the boat.” I picked up the sock and looked for its opening.

“No harm done. Happens all the time.”

I pushed her sock onto her foot, and followed with the boot, the laces tightening more crookedly then they’d been. “Feel all right?” I asked as I sat back on the stool. I winced.

“Thank you,” she said with a smile that dismissed my coming apology. The cellar was usually cool, but I felt quite warm. Tryphena’s forehead and lip shone with a thin gleam of sweat. “I’ve enjoyed this summer,” she said. “I’ve enjoyed every summer I’ve spent here, but this year it seems… I wish I just had a few more days.”

“I do, too. It’s… you’ve been great sport.”

“Yes.”

“I mean, I like having you here.”

“It’s been enjoyable,” she reiterated. She nodded and looked off to the side, as if looking for something. Her low collar was wide enough that I could see her clavicles, like smooth soap dishes, deepening with each breath. The skin beneath her throat reflected the window light as if the air rising beneath her dress were humid as breath—

“When I wake,” she said abruptly, turning herself so she was facing me. Her legs swung beneath the wooden arm of her chair and were quite suddenly well between mine. “When I wake every morning here, I think, before I’m fully awake, that I’m back at home. That I’m in my own bed in London and it’s raining outside. Or sometimes I think I’m even younger, back when we lived in Cornwall in the smaller house. For a few seconds, before I open my eyes, but even at times after I have, I think for sure that I am somewhere else. I see the ceiling above me and to my mind it is the ceiling in London.” She looked from one of my eyes to the other, mouth open, breaths coming more quickly and moving the front of her dress with them. “The lines and shapes of the ceiling of my bedroom here are quite different, but somehow my tired mind can see them to have different depths, different geometries, and I’m convinced I’m waking for another long autumn in London. But in those seconds, I know it’s not right. I have a feeling, not in my mind but in my body, that I am to wake happy, not sad.” She looked at my mouth, then back to my eyes. “And it is out of pure will that I force those lines and shadows of my London ceiling to, to come to a new alignment that is the angles and frieze of my room here.” She smiled at me, her hairline damp. “I come fully awake, and I’m here. And I wake happy.”

She looked at me, her eyes green as lush grasses. My lips moved several times before I said, “I like waking up, knowing you’re here.” She smiled wider. With the barest of effort, I could see her as either a girl or a woman, as if both lived within her skin and only the force of will was needed to move the geometries of her cheekbones and chin to let me see either.

She was looking at my mouth again, and the image brought a surge of tension where her knees rested between my thighs. I moved a hand to conceal it, but she looked down and quickly looked up and away, eyes wide. My jaw was open. “I…” She looked back, and our eyes were steady on one another’s.

“Check in here!” A muted voice. Footsteps thumped across the floorboards above.

“The stables are out of bounds.”

“No, the farm stables are. The riding stables are fair.”

“Look in the cellar.”

Fast footsteps thudded across the ceiling, thin bits of straw and dust floating down. I reached out, and Ty took my hand. The wall beside us rose up to a wide beam in the ceiling that ran under the floorboards above and down the other stone wall where the lantern hung. Even though it gave off an ugly light, we kept it lit while we slept. To wake up to the absolute black of the tunnels was to risk a twenty minute screaming fit.

About ninety seconds after we sent up the shit-rigged backfill cart, we’d heard Fitsner yelling a string of obscenities far up the gallery. We’d waited until our evening chow came down before sending up the kack-cart. It’d be too easy for Fitsner or Johnson to piss on our rations or something. They’d probably do it tomorrow, but that was tomorrow. Where we slept at the end of our gallery there was only a little more room than my shoulders’ width and only exactly as much as Hy’s. We lay head to head to fit in the tunnel and sometimes banged skulls in the night. We learned not to notice.

I lay and watched the tendrils of dust weave through the lantern’s dimness. There were no sounds at night except for Hy’s lungs and the whine of the day’s pickwork in my ears. We were supposed to rotate the pickwork in thirty-minute shifts; one person picks or digs out the advance while the other loads the backfill into the carts. We had no gloves to handle the rock slurry but it was better than digging. The pick numbed your arms, and spade-digging an advance reminded us that Germans were crawling on their bellies somewhere, too, digging and listening for us. But Hy seemed to dig longer than his thirty minutes and relieve me sooner. I never said anything about it. He sang when he took his daily kack-in-a-cart. We’d dug the advance on a new angle because Lipkin was sure there was a German tunnel between us and Fitsner and Johnson, so we were to pinch in and cut them off. Lipkin hadn’t been right about anything. We just dug. This dim, the lantern light was brown instead of yellow. This dim I could almost pretend I was somewhere else.

Through the droning ring in my head I heard Hy twist and resettle his width into the tunnel’s. His breath moved dust near the lamp. The tunnels were dead quiet at night. Everyone topside. Everyone but Hy and me. Neither of us had gone back up except when necessary and that bothered me from the first day he transferred in. I didn’t know why he stayed down here and I didn’t want to ask. I didn’t want to be in a tunnel with someone who was crazy enough to never want to get out of it. So we slept head-to-head and let everyone topside make nancy-boy jokes.

“Hy?”

There was a long moment before an abrupt inhale and grunt.

“You know what you said? About the moon? Just before you went down the advance? You said something about looking at the moon. You remember?”

There was another shift and and, “Aye.”

“Why’d you say that?”

“’Cause,” he said, and let out a lungful. “’Cause it’s true.”

“What’d you mean by it?”

“Why?”

“’Cause it… I don’t know why… What’d you mean?”

The dust between me and the lamp barely moved. Hy shifted again. His voice vibrated in the crown of my head. “How do you know you’re alive?”

“How—what?”

“How do you know you’re alive? You figure you are, right? How do you know?”

“I ask a really simple thing, you know? I—”

“How do you know?”

“I know because I’m breathing, and I know because I’m waving my hand around, and I know because I’m very aware that you’re a shit-wallah.”

Hy was laughing, “—shit-wallah.”

I didn’t say anything. All I’d asked was a simple question.

“You know about the First Certainty? ‘Cogito ergo sum?’ That the only thing you can know for sure is that you exist? Everything else is in doubt?”

“It’s Descartes,” I said quietly. “How do you know about Descartes?”

“First-year university. Didn’t you go to university?”

“Engineering college. Which—what university?”

“Descartes asks, what if God is a deceiving god? How can you be sure of anything in that case? And there’s really only one thing you can be sure of, even if God Almighty is a shit-wallah; Cogito ergo sum. Or, what Descartes really meant, ‘I experience that I experience, therefore I am.’ Can’t know anything else. Not for sure.” Hy’s head left mine and I heard him sitting up. “So things you think you know, like… red, how do you know you’re seeing the same thing everyone else sees when they see red?”

I lifted myself and settled against the wall.

Hy was cross-legged on the floor, a thick finger poking the air. “Don’t you see? There’s no way to know. Could be that this is all in my head. All of it. No matter what, for my whole life. All made up. I mean, Christ, think about it. How much sense does any of this make? We’re fifty-one fathoms underground digging through rock to blow up a German who’s digging through rock trying to blow us up? What the hell is that? What sense does that make? You know when you appear in a dream with a ready-made background? Like you know what’s going on and it makes sense, but in something like one dream in a hundred you sort of stop and think, ‘This doesn’t make sense.’ Well, stop and think. How much sense does this make?”

“Hy?” I asked. I waited. I didn’t actually have anything to say. I just wanted him to stop talking. He scratched big blunt fingers through his red hair. Flakes of skin lifted into the dark.

“All this fighting,” he continued, quieter, eyes wide, “but you never get killed. How many times in your life have you come close to getting killed? Falling off a roof? Bad illness? Lost in the woods? How many times did you come close to dying, but you never did, right? Somehow, you were always lucky, right? Pulled through the illness, fell on something soft, always something. How lucky can you be? You always hear of other people falling off roofs and dying, why not you? Not ever? Not even once? ‘Cause it’s you that’s making this little reality. You can do anything but stop.”

“Hy?” I still didn’t have anything to say. “You’ve obviously put a lot of thought into this, and you’re as excited about it as…” I pictured an excited Hieronymus, “…everything. But I asked you about the damned moon. And according to you, you’re a figment of my delusion.”

He was laughing before I’d finished. “I’m getting to the damned moon. And I’m not a figment of your insipid imagination, Dicky my boy. You, and all of this,” he rolled his big eyes, “is a figment of mine.” He let out a last twitch of laugh and smiled. A peculiar smile. “I’ve already messed with it.”

The lantern was just above my head. Hanging from a hook screwed into the stone. The light was kerosene brown. It reflected mad beneath Hy’s brow.

“What’d you mean?”

“Figured out, a long time ago, that if this,” he looked around and slapped at the walls with his fleshy palms, “if this is all just one big delusion of mine, then I ought to be able to fiddle with it, right? If it’s all me, then I should be able to alter it just by wanting it. I’m not real good at it yet, but I’m getting there. I’m getting better.”

“What,” and my words came measured and sharp, “in hell are you talking about?” The light reflected in his eyes. Mad light or mad eyes.

“You know I’m on my fourth tour, right?”

I nodded.

“Did you know I was on the lines, on the front lines for the last three?”

“My condolences.”

“No thanks. Ever hear of anybody surviving three tours on the front lines? Ever hear of anybody volunteering for three tours on the front lines? Ever hear of anyone making it through three tours anywhere and not getting one scratch? Curious?” He was beaming. “Fact is, I will them, the bullets, to miss me. I could walk straight across no-man’s-land, right up to the German army and punch it in the puss ‘cause I realized all I had to do was will the bullets to miss me or pass on through me like a fart. It’s my delusion. I’m just gettin’ a hold of it like a dull dream. A grenade lands next to me and I think: ‘I will the shrapnel to flow through me!’ And crack! The grenade goes off. I watch it. Nothing hits me. As you said, it’s all just figments of my delusion. Even this. Even you.” He smiled one of his billiard-ball smiles. “Sorry. But there you have it.”

“Answer me this. If you can do anything, then why are you three hundred feet underground in the worst place on earth? Why have you pulled four tours if you can just will your arse to some paradise? Why do you never go topside? I saw your transfer papers—I know you volunteered for this. Nobody volunteers for this. If you’re so damned powerful how come you’re stuck in the fuck-hole of the world?”

“I’ve got transfer papers?” Hy’s eyes were big. “Right, then, see? See what I mean? I never signed any transfer papers. I never had any transfer papers, but now you said I do so now I’ll expect to find them. You wait.” Huge eyes. Billiard teeth. “Lipkin will come up with papers out of nowhere. He’ll just have them lying around and it’ll seem utterly normal. You see? That’s why I’m here! My delusion’s not perfect. It buggers things up sometimes. I didn’t have any transfer papers but now it just said I did! Whoops! Ha!” Fat mitts slammed together. The laugh squeezed out. “Haaaaahaha!”

“Shut up!” I hissed. His echoes rang in the gallery.

“This is why I’m here! My delusion buggers up. I joined the front lines because I knew it buggered itself when it invented a war. I knew it! I heard about this war where everybody was fighting—everybody—and secret weapons and flying aeroplanes with bombs and I knew my little delusion just figured it was a colorful background bit, just something to put on a newspaper headline on the stand, but when I heard about it I knew it was a balls-up. I knew if I came here it’d have to build a super-war and somehow it’d have to make sense. It just got worse! It got more ridiculous! More impossible! Then another bugger-up—one bloke in the trench says he’d heard of a big sapper recruitment to Vauquois where tunnel warfare had gone all to hell and I thought ‘Oh, aye! Another balls-up!’ So I came here and damned if it’s not. This delusion had to crank out something. But Christ, what a kack-handed job it’s doing! This whole thing makes about as much sense as—what the hell, it makes no sense at all. It’s not even very imaginative. I’m stuck in a tunnel with a guy named dick! Christ! No offense, Dicky. I just started paying attention to what the hell is going on and it’s there. Little problems. Little incongruities. A lot of people with names too similar; people with pasts too much the same or saying things I’ve heard before. You just keep an eye out for them and they’re there.”

I sat. I stared. There wasn’t much else I could do. He was raving. Arms swirling big circles. Eyes swirling bigger ones. He stared at me like it was my line.

“Hy, if you get a really good night’s sleep, will you be sane in the morning?”

Billiard balls. “If it’s your world then just will it and I’ll be whatever you want, darling.”

“Lovely,” I said. The ground where we slept still smelled of Fitsner’s piss.

“But, it’s mine.”

“Then do me a favor, will Fitsner and his tiny pillock out of existence.”

“Ha!” Bolt-action, single-fire laugh. The echo rang for a long minute before he leaned in and said, “You want me to show you?”

My head hurt. “Show me what?”

“How. How I do it. How I mess with it. You want?” Hy reached behind and fumbled for a rock. He held it up in the light. “Watch.” He took the stone and scraped a round, whitish circle on the floor. He drew a second next to it. He set the stone in the first. “Now. I’ll move this rock from this circle to that one using only my will power, all right? Just the power of my mind. Nothing else.” He looked at me, one eyebrow up. The stone sat still and quiet. Hy’s breathing was quiet. The ringing was back in my ears. He dropped his gaze. Fixed on the stone. Glared at it. Reached a hand toward it. Hovered over it.

And picked it up and put it in the other circle.

“Oh, good God-all-bloody-mighty, Hy! What the hell was that! Goddamn. Goddamn this shit. I can’t believe I’ve even…” I rubbed my eyes.

“Good God-all-bloody-mighty? That’s Lipkin’s line. Christ, it just keeps reusing things.”

“Hy, you give me this damn speech when I asked you a simple question—about the moon, remember? And you… go through all this—I mean what the hell?”

“It’s in your hand.”

“What’s in my hand?”

“The ability to realize. That you’re alive.”

“What?”

“I stared at that stone.” He hefted it and it plopped in his palm. “And used my will power to move a whole lot of flesh sitting here, the arm-shaped flesh, to go over and pick up the rock. Look at this.” He held the rock before his face. “This rock is hanging here in front of me because I’m willing some other material to hold it. You’ve got to look at your hand sometime. Move your fingers. You’re moving real, physical stuff. You want it to go that way, it goes that way. You want it to grasp a rock, it grasps a rock. Your body isn’t part of you any more than the rock is. It’s all just part of your world, not part of you.” He was mesmerized by the pebble in his fingers. “It all starts in the fingers. And then you realize they’re not you. And then your arm isn’t either. And your body, and then your head and your eyes, your eyes are the hardest. You just keep backing up. Ignore your senses and back up. What’s you? What’s your delusion deluding? Whether it’s lying or not, you’re watching it. You. If you can ever get to that point where you realize that there is only one single thing that’s just you, that’s alive, then everything else is piffle. Everything else, everything else you can possibly ever think of is secondary and mutable and fickle next to that. Once you know that, skin is an arbitrary boundary, and you can do everything. And someday, once I get a hold of that one piece of solid and hang onto it and comprehend at every second that I exist, I’ll be able to make that piffle anything I want. Once I grasp it, I’m going to remake my world into something utterly impossible. I’m going to swim the oceans of the moon.” He focused on me for the first time in minutes. “They’re called mares. Latin, you know. When I’m swimming in the seas of the moon, I’ll know I made it. My world. My delusion. All in my control. No death. No unhappiness. Nothing I don’t want. So, that,” he smiled, eyebrows high, “is why I have my eye on the moon.”

I stared. There wasn’t much else to do.

A giant shrug. “Have any other questions?”

My head eased back and forth.

“Good. I’m pooped.”

He swung his huge self around and lay back down, wriggling his shoulders between the tunnel walls. I lay down slowly, top of my head against his. In moments Hy’s snores vibrated the bones in my skull.

I lay, and watched the motes sashay quietly by the warmth of the light. I closed my eyes and felt the cold of the floor and the sticky heat of the air. Fitsner’s piss cut through our own stink. Hy snored along to my ringing ears. Makes no sense. Opened one eye. The lamp was still there. Still brown the way I remembered brown. Closed again. Floor still cold. Piss still stinks. None of anything makes sense. Why were we in a tunnel fighting Germans? I’d never seen a German. Open. Lantern still there. Dust still there. Stone still cold under my palm. I inhaled slowly and closed my eyes again. Dank air swam inside me, through tunnels of lungs getting stickier and wet. The granite seemed to suck the warmth out of my fingertips despite the heat of the fire. Smell it and feel it and hear it and see it. Makes sense. My fingers grew cold enough that I took them from the granite table and warmed them in my lap. When I looked over my cards, Tryphena was eyeing me, watching every motion, every gesture to read anything from my movement. The point of bridge whist is to deduce others’ hands by listening to their bids. She was watching me for more than my cards.

“I bid a heart,” said Bogswell, tapping his cards on the table. Pushing them together and spreading them again.

“I’ll bid a club,” said Ty, quietly.

“Can you tell me,” everyone glanced at me, “what Proust’s ideas are if… if you lacked any memory at all. At least for a part of your life?”

Ty looked at Bogs and Millicent before answering. We were bidding at the last hand. The last round. For the last several minutes there had been utter silence as we scrutinized each other’s bids. “You mean, if—” her voice broke and she coughed lightly to cover it. “You mean if someone had no memory, how would he see the world?”

I nodded. “You said that we perceive the world not as it is, but as we interpret it—interpret it because of what we know, or believe we know of it.”

“Proust says that the older we get, the less we see reality. We see all the connotations and expectations we’ve built up of things, and no longer the things. Our memories give meaning to reality.”

“Then over a lifetime, we see reality less and less as it is.”

“You don’t taste a cup of tea; you taste a lifetime’s worth of memories linked to the taste, smell, and sight of that tea.”

“So what does Proust say would happen if you had no memories of tea?”

“I suppose you’d taste what tea is really is,” she said.

“And if you had a time of no memories of anything at all?

Ty shook her head. “Then… you’d see everything as it really is.”

Bogswell cleared his throat.

Ty ignored him. “Why?”

“Millicent,” said Bogs, “it’s your bid.”

“I don’t know.” I shook my head. “I don’t know.”

Millicent folded her cards onto the table. “I pass.”

“Well,” said Bogs, straightening and rolling his tongue behind his mustache again. “Richard. It would seem it’s all in your hand.”

“In my…” I looked at my cards. They seemed blank. I felt as though I were looking through them, through the granite table, through the floor and people and nothing my eyes landed on would remain firm. “I don’t…” I rubbed hard at my hairline. The abyss of uncertainty. “I bid two s—” I stopped myself suddenly. Looked up to Ty. Her lips were drawing down. Our hand was not poor. It could be strong if played well. But not if overplayed. Bidding too high now would force us to play an indefensible round. Bid with her. Bid one club.

“Two spades.” My own words seemed to echo in my head. “I bid two spades.”

Even the fire silenced.

Ty fought to control her curving mouth. Our eyes stayed locked. Her eyebrows twitched as emotions rippled across her face. I sat rigid, unable to take my eyes from her. Even as the fire backlit her face, her eyes gleamed wet. Her chin, still held proud, shook.

“Well,” murmured Bogs.

Millie burst into tears, hiding her face in her hand.

I reached across the table, and she quickly took my hand. With mouth hanging open, I shook my head. Her features suddenly collapsed in pain, lips stretched tight, beautiful eyes pressed thin.

My voice came quietly. “I have to go,” I said, still shaking my head. “It has to be.”

Her skin was hot and soft in my grip. I’d always loved to draw my fingers along her skin, across her cheek, trace her ear, stroke her fingers when she lay next to me at night. It was the softest thing I’d ever felt. Like warm morning mist slipping beneath my touch. There were days I’d stroke it for hours until the starch would break down and it would start to wear through. If they found out they’d replace it with a stiff new sheet so I kept the corner folded down. Nurse Mayhem strutted through our doorway with a chubby round mug.

“This is from the nurse’s lounge. Not the canteen,” she said as she handed it to me. She’d even brought a saucer.

“Is this to make up for trying to kill me?”

“I didn’t try; just instinct. How are you settling in, Kyne? Is Richard playing nice?”

Kyne said I was dandy. Maven said he didn’t know me well enough yet. She asked him if he needed anything to help him feel at home and he said no, so she laid out some papers for him on his bed. They were orientation pamphlets and medical briefings. He’d get an official orientation of the “retention facility” in the morning.

“And downstairs is the main lounge. You can get a bit to eat down there and there’s a television. You’re welcome to watch it anytime from noon to midnight. All right?” Kyne nodded yes and she turned to me. “You all right? No nausea?” No. She left with the slight click of heels on tile.

“I think I’ll go down, watch some telly. Want to come?”

“No,” I said. “Thanks, but no. I don’t watch that thing.” He looked at me oddly. “I haven’t seen the rest of the world for decades. Seeing it now would just hurt.”

“Really? You never watch? Perhaps you should. Might spur your memory. Help you remember things.”

I smiled. “I already know I regret it. Whatever it was, it wasn’t worth throwing away my whole life. I can’t do anything to change it. If I knew what it was, it would just gnaw at me for the last of my days.”

Kyne nodded slightly in the doorway. He shrugged and said, suppose you’re right. I told him where the lounge was and he started to leave.

“Kyne?”

He reappeared in the doorway.

“Why would God be so intent on hiding himself? Why would a creator hide from his creation?”

He shrugged. Twice. “Maybe creation is hidden from him.”

We smiled at each other and he left the doorway. I listened to his feet make their way down the hall to the stair. The tea was hot but nurses don’t drink better than criminals. I put the cup and saucer on my dresser, picked up my cane and walked to the doorway, peering after Kyne. His shadow took the steps slowly against the flickering blue. I’d seen that lounge at night. All the lights off. Everyone sitting and watching out a flickering window at a world that didn’t exist. Never knew how they could stand it. The top of the stair leapt brighter and darker, and every now and then it would hit a lovely cutting blue. Kyne’s shadow disappeared as he found someplace to sit and watch someone else’s world.

Outside my window the bare black poplars were digging their nails at the sky. Moon-drawn shadows wriggled on the snow next to them. Bluing snow and blackening sky. The moon was out of sight, just overhead. Or maybe it wasn’t. My whole world was what I could picture from my window. I could see the sun rise and a little girl walk over a hill. I could watch poplars grow old and die. I could see the moon come up on winter evenings. But that’s all I could see.

Downstairs in the lounge, everyone laughed.

At the very end of the hallway, where the blackness was only occasionally broken by an open door, was the stairwell to the roof.

I wasn’t running, but I had to flick the cane quickly. Keep an ear out for the clicking of heels on tile. Past one door. Past another. Into the blackness. Half a wing of sleepies. Door at the end with a little sanguine light over it. Way down the hall. I skittered as quietly as could, so shhhh. Listening for heels on tiles. Making for the door. One big view. One big view of the real world. Three hundred and sixty degrees and a million overhead. Maybe see the schoolhouse. Maybe see a town. Maybe see a mountain range behind me and constellations that never rotated to my side of the world. Maybe see a world that’s right in the head. Listen for clicking heels and make for the door. Make for the stairwell. Make like a rabbit. Makes no sense. Unlocked doors and nurses in heels. Make for the door! Make past the darkened rooms down the long skinny row toward that light. Step careful in slippers. Don’t fall. Hunched and shuffling. Hold the cane tight. Make for the light and hear my breathing echo off the walls around me. Step careful old man! Left foot right foot step just so. Brown light bobbing. Wooden handle in hand. Make for the light! Make it out! Make it out! Step careful and don’t drop the shovel. Left foot right foot, the lantern ahead bobbing. The spade banging my knee and Hy bent beneath the light. Leaning against the wall, teeth tight on the blade of his shovel. Fingers in his ears. Listening. The air pumps broke down again and we waited until they were fixed. We were repairing a pick head when tick, tick, tick. Not out near the advance. Back closer to the manway. Back in the north-south lateral.

“Johnson’s gone up to tell Lipkin. I’ve got Fitsner listening in his gallery.” Out of breath. “What have you got? Can you hear?” Christ, can’t breathe. “Are they there?”

Hy, wide teeth set through the dirt of the shovel, raised a finger. Then widened his eyes. Then took his teeth from the blade. Started looking around the ceiling. I grabbed the lamp and thrust it at the roof. Tiny flakes falling. Tick. Tick.

“Holy Christ.” Hy.

“Fitsner!” I hissed, loud as I dared, down the tunnel. “Above us! Fitsner in the roof!”

Lamp moving at the manway. Hieronymus stood, bent, and put his ear to the ceiling. I could hear it fine.

“Fitsner! In the roof!”

Tick-tick. Tick. Tick-tick.

Fitsner and his lantern running toward me. “Real faint down there! Hardly catch it at all! It’s closer to your end! It’s closer to you!”

“Christ christ where the hell are you…” I was moving my hands along the ceiling, holding the lamp up.

“What do we do?” yelled Fitsner. “We’ve got no nitrate down here! We’ve got nothing!” Squealing. “What do we—”

“Shut your fuckin’ gob!” Hy’s lungs, reverberating in the tunnel.

Tick-tick. Tick-tick-tick.

“Hy!” I yelled. “It’s closer over here!” Hy moving fast. Little flakes.

“Dig up into ‘em?” he said. “What’d you think? Dig up into them and—”

“What if they got camouflets and—!”

“Shut it Fits! Wasn’t one of us supposed to will him out of existence?”

“What?”

Hy’s face alive in the lamp light. “One of us needs a stronger will.”

“Aw Christ, don’t lose it on me now, Hy.”

A laugh and tick-tick-tick.

“Richard, that’s farther—that’s down near Fitsner’s end. What the—”

“Hy.” I tilted the lamp toward the ceiling. “Let’s get the hell out of here.”

“What? We‘ve got the upper hand on the Jerry bastards!”

Fitsner: “It’s louder down here now!”

“The hell…”

“Hy, you know when they lost Nord—You know they didn’t clear everyone out, don’t you? They were so terrified of the German army pouring out of their own tunnels they just lit the powder.”

“They won’t do that to us.”

“Johnson is telling them right now that we’ve got Jerries intersecting.”

The tunnel fell dead quiet. No air hoses hissing. No picks. Not even three men breathing. When it came again it was much too close.

Tick-tick-tick-tick.

“It’s right over me! It’s right here!”

“How the hell are they moving all over! Where are they crossing?”

“Let me get by you.” Hy’s bulk crushed me against the wall as he pushed by. Air was getting thicker. Needed the air hoses back on.

“They can’t be above Fitsner and here! This makes no sense!”

“Hey, I do my best!” A big smile on Hy’s face. “This is my first reality, you know.”

“They can’t have two tunnels, can they? They wouldn’t dig them this close would they?”

“Oh God.” Fitsner’s whine. “They don’t do they?”

“No. I don’t know. Hy, what the hell? Hy! What if they’re running parallel! What if they’re not crossing our lateral but paralleling it!” Hy’s face looking at me in his lantern light. “If they’re running parallel, then they must know exactly where we are! They’re not looking to blast us—they want to connect! They’re going to drop on us!”

“Bloody hell!” from Hy. Not a curse. Excitement.

“They’re down here!” Fitsner.

“Holy Christ, get me out of this”

“Whoooo! Fits is right! They’re down here too! Knocking dust off the ceiling!”

“Hy, we’ve got no air we’ve got no powder and we’re going to be buried by both sides! Let’s get the hell out!”

“Come on, this is alive! This is—” Tick-tick-tick-tick “Right here! Right above me!”

“I’m getting out, Hy! Come on!”

“Not bloody likely!”

“Hy! Hieronymus! This is madness! This is absolute bloody madness!”

“I know it’s madness, Dicky-boy! It’s all bloody insane! The whole goddamn world has gone stark staring mad and I’m in it! Whooohoooooooooo!” Screaming echoes as he pounded his hips into the wall like rutting dog. “It’s everything! It’s everything and it’s mine and I love it! I love this goddamn fantastic madness!”

“Hy! This is no game! They—”

“Remember, Dicky!” Mad eyes in his lamp light. “It’s in your hand! Watch your fingers!” Mad and fire. Flittering flakes.

I fell against the wall. “I’m getting the hell out!” The air was thinner and thicker tick-tick-tick-tick my lantern was hanging beside.

“Fingers, Dicky! Fingers!”

Fifty-one fathoms. Dust coming down. Hy beneath his lamp.

“Move it, Fits! Fingers, Dicky!”

Heavy air. Rock raining dust. I lifted my hand. Looked at my fingers. Cracks of dry from tips to palm. Blackened and brown in the lamplight. Aged well beyond my years. Almost don’t look like mine. Slender lines of pink between. Brown and pink and brown and pink. My fingers, browned with dirt of the pasture and hers still pink in the shaft of sunlight. Interlocked. Still holding her hand.

“Tryphena!” the voices called from above, the straw and dust floating down from the ceiling boards. “Tryphena, your dad’s coach is here! They’re packing your trunk already! You have to come out!”

“I have to go,” she said, just above a whisper.

“I know. I know.” The footsteps echoed hard on the boards above. Moved toward the door. Were coming here.

“I wanted to…” We were still looking at each other. The golden sunlight radiated from her face.

“I wish we had more time.”

She nodded. Tried to laugh. “It’ll be hard to try to change my London ceiling into this one. I’ll be… I’ll be sad when I wake up tomorrow.”

“Wait,” I said, letting go of her hand. “Wait.” I looked around and found a piece of stone on the floor. I pushed back my stool and scrawled two circles onto the floor between us. “It’s a trick. I can move this stone from this circle to that one using just my mind power.” Tryphena’s expression wavered between the smile and confusion. Her eyes followed my hand as it hovered over the stone. I didn’t think I had to think anything in particular.

I picked up the stone and placed it in the other circle.

We both looked at the rock. Ty looked up to me. “You touched it.”

“I know. I was supposed to.” The rock sat limply on the floor. Something else was supposed to happen.

The sound of cellar door jerking open. “Ty? Your coach is here!”

“Is that all that happens?” she asked.

“I don’t know.”

“Where did you learn it?”

“I don’t know. It’s supposed to help somehow. The…” I raised my palm. “It’s not part of me. It’s as you were saying. Your legs. But not…”

Her eyes narrowed. Searching me. Confused.

“I don’t know what was supposed… ” I said.

“Tryphena, Richard.” Eliot, her brother, caught sight of us in the stall. “Your coach is here, Ty.” He came in, toward her chair handles.

Ty, still searching my eyes. My mouth still open.

Eliot kicked off her brake and pushed out of the stall.

“No, wait—” I tried.

“Can’t wait,” he said. “Come say goodbye with everyone.”

“Wait—I—Ty,” but she was already around the corner of the stall.

The stone and circles lay at my feet. I looked at my hands, confusion and anger. The walls of the stall. The wooden boards above. The tracks of her wheelchair in the dust. My palm and fingers, as if staring back at me. As if waiting. The sound of the cellar door yanked open. I ran my arm across my nose and it was wet and sticky. I sniffed loudly but it wasn’t much use, the cold was getting in my eyes and they were running too. I wiped my nose again against the shoulder of my shirt and tried to plant the cane firmly with each step. There was an inch of snow across the entire rooftop and it crackled beneath my slippers. I’d probably catch cold before they’d catch me, but it would be worth it.

It was white. Not blue snow here on the roof. White. Moonlight white. On the far side was a little road winding through depressions between hills. Some little yellow lights. Little houses. Not a whole town, but a few little houses. Up to one side was the dividing line between another ancient farmer’s field. Dying fence and withering poplars. The air swept across me. Thick and full and rich and cold. The cane shook in my hand. I turned, full about. A slow circle in the dim light. Hills and tree lines and iced streams and lights and blue snow, white snow, old roads, barbed wire, and seasoned smoke. My eyes stung and my nose still watered.

Against a chimney missing bricks was a chair. A patio chair with half a seat and swaying nylon straps. Covered in snow and waiting. Crunch and crackle as I made my way and brushed the seat and armrests. Rusting and cold. A leftover from rumored staff parties. Leaning on the cane, oh so careful, I eased myself down.

Before me were my poplars, a turn to the left were the distant houses, a turn to the right were rolling hills of unbroken clean. And beyond my poplars? What was that? A line. Gray. A straight line of a roof just visible behind the hill. A schoolhouse perhaps? Perhaps a schoolhouse. I drank wind from a thousand miles hence and a thousand yet to go. I watched my breath steam with vigor in the cold and moonlight. I wasn’t smiling, but I felt as if I were. I leaned in and breathed on my hands. A flake of snow on my cane. Like something huge in the dim white light. I brushed my thumb against it and it flittered away to my feet. I stared at my thumb.

My thumb.

I repeated the move. Brush along the handle from middle to end. Left to right. My thumb.

I drew back, staring at my hand. At my thumb. Rounded nail a pearl. Wrinkles in thin white pink. Lines and ripples and hairs and bones. I wanted it to stroke the handle. It didn’t move.

I wanted it to stroke the handle. I wanted it more. Nothing. Drive it with a force of will, and it was just enough! The thumb arced through the pendulum knuckle and brushed the handle from middle to edge. Will it again! Middle to edge. Other thumb. Move! Movement. Left, right. Raise up. Dip, stroke, bend, retreat, come close, like a word continually repeated until its meaning vanishes, leaving only the word itself, suddenly hollow, fresh, and foreign. My hand, fresh and—foreign.

And it was then that I pulled my self out of my hand, as if withdrawing from a glove. I reeled myself in, unsticking from the skin of my arms, withdrawing myself and seeing the great piece of arm-shaped flesh still holding the cane before me. I retreated from my legs and body and in a blink I was barely hovering within my skull with this foreign mass below me and the sound of wind evaporating and the very grunt of my pulse through my ears fading and sight ignored—as if sunken in the depths of thought, but with no return to senses. Meaningless. Irrelevant. Everything, every thing said over and over until it was suddenly fresh and new and meaningless and gone! No sound or sight or feeling or scent but I still am. Withdrawing shrinking retreating and memories fall away and dissolve into the abyss of uncertainty. They were remembered to something and that something now hears the very thoughts with which it describes itself. What listened to my old eyes? What paid them attention? What observer of every thought and memory? I did! I!

And beneath the last layer, beneath even the idea of it, am I.

I.

Am.

And from this—everything!

All else is fluid. Substantial as vapor. Everything. This is what it all balances upon.

I expand. Rush. Filling everything. Filling my thoughts my memories my senses my head my skin my rooftop my view my world. My old eyes are staring at light, at white, at the moon! Rush upward and expand! White and round and etched with oceans, the moon swelled and stretched to the horizons. Whole mountain ranges, cut from the black sky beyond, lifted and rose as I plummeted between them and splash! I shot into the white, dust leaping around me like wings. I bobbed to the surface. Overhead stroke, diving into the waves of bright dust and I laughed. I shouted, skitting across the sea surface. Lungful and screeeeeam. Below above the feathery-warm waves. Haaaaa! I rolled over to drift and the black sky rolled over with me. Black sky dusted gray with stars and stars and I shouted again! Every point of every thing was mine. All of it, the universe—Mine! I couldn’t stop laughing. I shouted and shouted and sang and it all vibrated with me, resonating across space and worlds shaking with excitement and screaming with me the single, fantastic, delirious thought; I Am! I Am!

It had always been the best of all possible worlds. And I knew, like nothing I’d known before, that I would give anything for this.

That I would give everything.

I turned and saw Hy bent low as he leaned against the tunnel wall, listening. I eased out my sidearm and willed two bullets into his back and a third into his turning cheek. I turned and walked toward the manway. The tunnels glided by, the dust grew thinner and the air sweeter. I left Fitsner quiet down there, too. I knew the Germans would break through, knew how many on both sides would die. But it didn’t matter. I knew how it ends. I know it has to be. I stepped into Olean bunker, past strange expressions, and made my way up the last slope to the brightness beyond. My feet stepped in the damp of snows trickling their way in. Snows reflecting the brilliance of a winter day just beyond the rise in the tunnel. The glint alone was painful to darkened eyes, but the great, round hole that crested above the curving floor took my breath. It rose slowly as I walked. Larger than I remembered. Brighter than I believed. Warm. Soft. I could hear people shouting now. But I couldn’t care. They dimmed, and I was crying.

Arms in wide embrace, I walked into the blinding light of the moon.